add ambient mesh resource saving blog (#13179)
istio/istio.io: content/en/blog/2023/ambient-performance-savings/index.md

    >}}

{{< image width="100%"
    link="resource-usage.png"
    caption="CPU and Memory usage for cluster"
    >}}

Let’s start by looking at CPU usage by pod. In the sidecar scenarios, the containers utilizing the most CPU resources are the [frontend](https://github.com/GoogleCloudPlatform/microservices-demo/tree/main/src/frontend) service sidecars, which is the main server hit by the load generators and also responsible for making any subsequent calls to other underlying microservices.

In the ambient scenarios, a particular ztunnel's performance depends on the distribution of services across the nodes in the cluster. Ztunnels do use more CPU than a sidecar, but each ztunnel is handling inbound and outbound connections for about 48 application pods whereas a sidecar is responsible for only one.  In the ambient with both ztunnel and waypoint proxy scenario, there is an increase in average CPU usage per ztunnel as traffic is now directed to waypoint proxies. The waypoint proxies themselves consume more resources than their sidecar counterparts.  This is expected since there are only 3 waypoints handling L7 processing for all 48 pods in the namespace.

> Next is memory usage by pod. In both ambient scenarios, the L4 ztunnel consumes less memory than a sidecar. In fact, in the L4 only scenario, almost all three ztunnel instances combined consume less memory than a single sidecar. Ztunnels are able to serve multiple applications while consuming fewer resources than sidecars because they are lightweight and written in Rust. Waypoint proxies consume a similar amount of resources as sidecars do, but once again see a minor increase due to the same reasons outlined above for CPU. So what do these per pod usages mean for the totals across the cluster? Everything.

Reviewer: > because they are lightweight and written in Rust

I think there's a bit more at play here and we should probably help to clarify a bit upfront. The sidecar is actually composed of an istio-agent (written in Go) and Envoy (written in C++). The istio-agent is what establishes the XDS connection to istiod. Envoy then establishes an XDS connection to the istio-agent, which is acting as an XDS proxy to istiod.

So yes, Rust means lightweight and potentially faster than the Go code. Envoy on the other hand is C++, which could potentially be as light and faster than Rust. However, it's likely slower than our ztunnel due to Envoy's architecture not being optimized well for our partiular use case (HBONE). To expand this even further, ztunnel combines the roles of istio-agent and the proxy into a single binary, which eliminates the baggage of multiple processes, multiple XDS connections, and the duplication of memory/CPU that all of that entails.

Even if we keep the discussion of "how sidecars actually work" to a minimum, it would probably go a long way to help explain why we're better across the board.

@howardjohn any thoughts?

Reviewer 2: I agree with everything you said, https://istio.io/latest/blog/2023/rust-based-ztunnel/#a-purpose-built-ztunnel covers this a bit as well. Which really boils down to "purpose built, and designed to have a small footprint".
At a small scale, the agent (which is mostly a fixed cost) is likely a high percentage. In a large cluster where envoy is using like 500mb or something, the agent aspect is probably not particularly relevant, and the other aspects become more important.

Reviewer 3: Would it be sufficient to provide a link to the ztunnel blog given this blog is focusing on resource saving?

Reviewer 2: Yeah that SGTM. Something like "See here for details on why its lightweight" or similar

Reviewer 3: @GregHanson can you address this comment? Thanks!

Reviewer: Honestly, I think a short introduction of both sidecar and ztunnel with diagrams for how they differ would go a long way here. Definitely provide the link as well for more information.

Author: @nmittler I updated to include a sentence directing users to the blog for some more clarification.  I can also delete the phrase entirely as well.  This section was more for discussing results than comparing the two architectures.  If it is a blocker for you, I can add some images from https://istio.io/v1.15/blog/2022/introducing-ambient-mesh/#istio-and-sidecars to the `Where the Savings Are Coming From` section

Reviewer: I really think images and a short overview of how the architectures differ will be essential to the reader understanding the performance difference. I don't think a simple link is enough. We don't really capture this information anywhere today ... at least not with a concise comparison with diagrams.

Reviewer 3: I am very worried about adding architecture differs and explanations here to sidetrack the main purpose of the blog. If we didn't explain the architecture differs in the announcement blog well, we have another opportunity to clarify them in the ambient docs.  @GregHanson showed me the 2 diagrams he built, i think it is too much details to get to pilot-agent, XDS, SDS, etc for this blog.

Reviewer: @linsun 

> If we didn't explain the architecture differs in the announcement blog well, we have another opportunity to clarify them in the ambient docs

We don't currently have a good link to give readers for a concise overview. We can't make this blog dependent on some future doc being refactored or re-written just to provide context here. 

>  i think it is too much details to get to pilot-agent, XDS, SDS, etc for this blog.

I strongly disagree. This is a technical blog that requires that the reader understands not only the architecture of ztunnel but how it differs from sidecar. Differences in memory consumption and CPU are in no small part due to not only the language (rust vs golang), but also architecture. The reader needs to understand that to understand the results.

Reviewer 4: I'm not really sure I grok Nathan's specific ask in his comments so I'm not clear if this is agreement/restatement or just another perspective.

I view the salient point as switching from per-pod to per-node (or per-node + per-ns/sa on L7) reduces resource use pretty sharply as stated in the "Where the Savings Are Coming From" section. Language selection and pilot-agent and custom proxy optimized for L4 are arguably all related details but they don't provide the bulk of the savings.

If a diagram is needed I think finding a way to make it simple and to highlight the move from sidecar to ztunnel (optionally +waypoint) for the data plane is what we'd want to focus on in this blog. The rest could be probably be omitted.

I'm not arguing that the text should avoid mentioning these other points but that perhaps we can leave visually depicting them to another blog post.

Finally, let’s consider allocation since the graphs above have only covered usage. Every sidecar resource has a default request of 100 millicores vCPU and 128 MB memory. For simplicity, we assume ztunnels and waypoint proxies have similar requests and limits as their sidecar counterparts. Breaking it down, that’s a 98% reduction in allocated resources with ztunnel, and 90% when waypoints are included.

{{< image width="100%"
    link="allocation.png"
    caption="CPU and memory allocation and cost breakdown for sidecar and ambient scenarios"
    >}}

Going further, we can calculate a dollar amount for these numbers by referring to [GCP monthly pricing](https://cloud.google.com/compute/vm-instance-pricing) for a monthly cost per GB memory and per CPU. Consider these two different machines and their costs:

- `n2-standard-4` (4 CPU, 16 GB) at $141/month
- `n2-highmem-4` (4 CPU, 32 GB) at $191/month

Calculating the difference in memory results in 1GB costing $3.33/month. Similarly for CPU:

- `n2-standard-4` (4 CPU, 16 GB) at $141/month
- `n2-highmem-2` (2 CPU, 16 GB) at $95/month

> Calculating the difference results in 1 CPU costing approximately $23/month. We can literally put a dollar amount on the savings ambient brings!

Reviewer 3: @GregHanson chatting with @howardjohn offline, this sentence made him to think saving is $23 per month.   Maybe no need to highlight this?  We just need to say A CPU cost X, we use Y CPUs, so we cost Z a month (for sidecars or ambient L4 or L4 & L7).

Author: updated, PTAL

## Check Out the Savings

Our test scenario deploys four instances of the [Online Boutique](https://github.com/GoogleCloudPlatform/microservices-demo), each to their own namespace, with each underlying microservice scaled to 3 replicas. There will be a total of 48 application services and 144 applications pods in this setup. Test scenarios utilize the provided [loadgenerator](https://github.com/GoogleCloudPlatform/microservices-demo/tree/main/src/loadgenerator) microservice running in each of the namespaces to generate traffic during the observed window. The tests deployed Istio in several scenarios and resource usage and allocation are compared across the runs. The scenarios are:

- Istio with sidecar
- Ambient with L4 ztunnel only
- Ambient with L4 ztunnel and L7 waypoint proxies (one per namespace, scaled to 3 replicas)

There are significant savings across the board for all ambient scenarios when compared to sidecars – up to 99% savings with only L4 and 89% with L4+L7.

{{< image width="100%"

>     link="savings.png"

Reviewer 5: Is it possible to convert this image into an editable table?

Reviewer 3: yep... possible

- [Ztunnels](/blog/2023/rust-based-ztunnel/) are a brand new Istio component written in Rust that are designed to be fast, secure, and lightweight. Ztunnels are deployed per node and serve all pods co-located on the node. They enable the most basic service mesh configurations for L4 features such as mTLS, telemetry, authentication, and L4 authorizations.
- [Waypoint proxies](/blog/2023/waypoint-proxy-made-simple/) provide L7 mesh features such as VirtualService routing, L7 telemetry, and L7 authorizations policies. Waypoints are still based on Envoy and are deployed per namespace or service account.

These ztunnels and waypoint proxies work in tandem to replace sidecars in the Istio service mesh, and most importantly, unlike sidecars they scale independent to a user's applications pods. So let’s take a closer look at how the two architectures compare in the scenarios above.

## A Closer Look

{{< image width="100%"
    link="cpu-by-pod.png"
    caption="CPU usage by pod for sidecar and ambient pods"
    >}}

{{< image width="100%"
    link="memory-by-pod.png"
    caption="Memory usage by pod for sidecar and ambient pods"
    >}}

{{< image width="100%"

>     link="resource-usage.png"

Reviewer 5: Is it possible the convert this png into an editable table?

Reviewer 3: sorry but this blog is not ready yet.  we  can look into an editable table.

---

> title: "Cut Service Mesh Overhead with Istio Ambient Mesh"

Reviewer 6: Two notes:

* this is written from the perspective of "use it today", which I believe is Solo's recommendation, but should not be the Istio project recommendation.  It should be toned down in the edit.
* you may get SEO problems or challenges if you have a blog that is basically just a reposted version of https://www.solo.io/blog/reduce-cloud-cost-istio-ambient-mesh/.  

In general,  I'd encourage you to substantially differ from the Solo blog.  We never adopted them, but if we had, the [Istio blog guidelines](https://github.com/macruzbar/istio.io/blob/dfe2fc0b33a830155199622633f5bc2c57f2ce4c/content/en/blog/README.md) state "The Istio blog only publishes original content; we do not re-post content that has been posted elsewhere".

That said, I find this content compelling and my opinion is that we should be posting something very much like this whenever the time is right.  I am not appropriately in the loop to comment on if that time is now.

Reviewer 7: +1 to what craig box said. Istio project recommendation is to NOT jump and use this today. Solo, as vendor, can say whatever they see fit.  Same thing for any home page promo around ambient right now when its not prime time ready. @linsun needs to understand that project website and vendor website are very different and treating them same is very dangerous to the community, users and project overall.

Reviewer 3: @craigbox can you help point out where the blog is written as "use it today"? It is mentioned multiple times (beginning and conclusion) that ambient is alpha in the blog.  Happy to correct or clarify as needed to make this clear.

description: An anaylsis of how cloud resources are utilized in ambient and sidecar service mesh architectures.
publishdate: 2023-07-14
attribution: "Greg Hanson - Solo.io"
keywords: [istio,ambient,waypoint,ztunnel]
---

> Istio Ambient Mesh is the new Istio data plane without requiring sidecars, refer to the [announcement](/blog/2022/introducing-ambient-mesh/) for more details. Istio Ambient Mesh is included in [Istio 1.18](https://github.com/istio/istio/releases/tag/1.18.0) but is still considered to be in [alpha feature status](/docs/releases/feature-stages/#feature-phase-definitions).
> 
> Sidecars have been a staple of Istio’s architecture since day one and are responsible for the majority of features available in Istio today. However, sidecars require the injection of an additional container to each Kubernetes pod resource, each of which needs allocated resources from the pod.
> 
> Many of you are familiar with the simplified operation brought by the Istio ambient architecture. Let’s explore how ambient mesh cuts the service mesh costs typically associated with sidecars.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Last year the Istio community announced [ambient mesh](/blog/2022/introducing-ambient-mesh/), a new data plane mode which replaces sidecar proxies with per-namespace proxies.

[Sidecars](/docs/reference/glossary/#sidecar) have been a staple of Istio’s architecture since day one, and are the way that most of Istio's features are provided today.  However, sidecars require the injection of an additional container to each Kubernetes `Pod` resource, and each sidecar container requires resources be allocated to it.

Ambient mesh was released in [alpha](/docs/releases/feature-stages/#feature-phase-definitions) in [Istio 1.18](/news/releases/1.18.x/announcing-1.18/). This makes it easy to install, test, and to preview what it will mean for you when it's production-ready.

Aside from the many other benefits of ambient mesh, the simple fact you no longer have to run as many proxies means that you can expect resource (and thus cost) savings. As you will see, these can be very substantial.
```

> ## Check Out the Savings

Reviewer 6: less bolshy heading

You're about to mention ztunnel and waypoints; at this point I think it would pay to reintroduce them.  Don't assume people have read the Ambient blog.

> Our test scenario deploys four instances of the [Online Boutique](https://github.com/GoogleCloudPlatform/microservices-demo), each to their own namespace, with each underlying microservice scaled to 3 replicas. There will be a total of 48 application services and 144 applications pods in this setup. Test scenarios utilize the provided [loadgenerator](https://github.com/GoogleCloudPlatform/microservices-demo/tree/main/src/loadgenerator) microservice running in each of the namespaces to generate traffic during the observed window. The tests deployed Istio in several scenarios and resource usage and allocation are compared across the runs. The scenarios are:

Reviewer 8: You're currently running a demo that utilizes a loadgenerator to simulate actual traffic. I'm interested in determining the volume of traffic and the QPS (queries per second) rate, as this information is crucial for analyzing the resource utilization of various modes.

Author: here is the source code for loadgenerator, it cycles through a list of different operations (lookup, browse, checkout, etc):
https://github.com/GoogleCloudPlatform/microservices-demo/blob/main/src/loadgenerator/locustfile.py#L67

There is an open issue in that repo for exposing the ability to tune things like request freuqency, but it currently isn't supported:
https://github.com/GoogleCloudPlatform/microservices-demo/issues/1692

the current QPS of each loadgenerator service is about 1-2 seconds for each request.

This was something I struggled with.  Bookinfo could not handle a large amount of requests per second, but I couldn't find a public microservice demo that could handle something like fortio driving large QPS.  The other part I struggled with was then writing an appropriate driver.  Something like fortio definitely gave me the options for configuring QPS, but to mimic a true env I would need it to be hitting a list of API's rather than a single one for the entire test duration.  These were the factors that led me to choose the boutique demo

Reviewer 8: That make sense. Have you take the [distributed load generator](https://docs.locust.io/en/stable/running-distributed.html) of Locust into consideration?

- Istio with sidecar
- Ambient with L4 ztunnel only
- Ambient with L4 ztunnel and L7 waypoint proxies (one per namespace, scaled to 3 replicas)

> Spoilers! There are significant savings across the board for all ambient scenarios when compared to sidecars – up to 99% savings in usage and 98% in allocation.

Reviewer 3: Is it 98% saving in allocation for L4 + L7? You said 90% below in line 32. please clarify and make it consistent.

Reviewer 3: Or I would just focus on savings here, not dive into details of allocations or consumption which you did in the next section.

> Spoilers! There are significant savings across the board for all ambient scenarios when compared to sidecars – up to 99% savings with only L4 and 89% with L4+L7.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
There are significant savings across the board for all ambient scenarios when compared to sidecars – up to 99% savings with only L4 and 89% with L4+L7.
```

{{< image width="100%"
    link="savings.png"
    caption="Total Memory and CPU: Consumption and Allocation"
    >}}

> Looking at total CPU and memory consumption, we have to remember that in the [ambient architecture](/blog/2022/introducing-ambient-mesh/), there are not sidecar containers for every application pod in the mesh. The result is that memory usage of Istio’s dataplane in the ztunnel-only ambient scenario uses *less than 1%* of what is used in sidecar scenarios, and still only 12% when waypoints are added. Looking at CPU, ztunnel once again uses 18% of what the sidecar scenario requires, and 60% when waypoints are deployed.

Reviewer 3: suggest to talk about allocation first then resource usage as the above paragraph was about allocation so it transitions better.

> Looking at [total CPU and memory consumption numbers](#a-closer-look), we have to remember that in the [ambient architecture](/blog/2022/introducing-ambient-mesh/), there are no sidecar containers for every application pod in the mesh. The result is that memory usage of Istio’s dataplane in the ztunnel-only ambient scenario sees *more than 99% savings* compared to sidecar scenarios, and still 89% savings when waypoints are added. Looking at CPU, ztunnel once again sees 82% savings compared to the sidecar scenario, and 40% savings when waypoints are deployed.

Reviewer 6: We led with "there are no sidecar containers", so this could be rewritten

```suggestion
Looking at [total CPU and memory consumption numbers](#a-closer-look), we see that we can remove the allocations required for a sidecar container in every application pod in the mesh. The result is that memory usage of Istio’s dataplane in the ztunnel-only ambient scenario sees *more than 99% savings* compared to sidecar scenarios, and still 89% savings when waypoints are added. Looking at CPU, ztunnel once again sees 82% savings compared to the sidecar scenario, and 40% savings when waypoints are deployed.
```

> Moving on to allocation, every sidecar resource has a default request of 100 millicores vCPU and 128 MB memory.  Assuming ztunnels and waypoint proxies have similar requests and limits as sidecars, that’s a *98% reduction* in allocated resources between L4 ambient and sidecar and 90% with waypoints!

Reviewer 3: It is confusing that you separated cpu and mem for resource consumption but talk them together for allocation.

Reviewer 3: I would just focus on savings here, not dive into details of allocations or consumption which you did in the next section.

> ## Where the Savings Are Coming From
> 
> Ambient mesh was designed to minimize resource requirements for users in their Kubernetes clusters. To explain how ambient does this, we must first clarify allocation versus utilization. When deploying a Kubernetes cluster, nodes determine the overall capacity of the cluster and customer deployments, and pods are an allocation of that capacity. Utilization is a measure of how well this is done. As an architecture, sidecars interfere with effective utilization as they:

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
## Where the Savings Are Coming From

Ambient mesh was designed to minimize resource requirements for users in their Kubernetes clusters. To explain how ambient does this, we must first clarify _allocation_ versus _utilization_. When deploying a Kubernetes cluster, nodes determine the overall capacity of the cluster and customer deployments, and pods are an allocation of that capacity. Utilization is a measure of how well this is done. As an architecture, sidecars interfere with effective utilization as they:
```

> Ambient mesh was designed to minimize resource requirements for users in their Kubernetes clusters. To explain how ambient does this, we must first clarify allocation versus utilization. When deploying a Kubernetes cluster on a hosted environment, nodes determine the overall capacity of the cluster and customer deployments, and pods are an allocation of that capacity. Utilization is a measure of how well this is done. As an architecture, sidecars interfere with effective utilization as they:

Reviewer 3: * on a hosted environment *

No need to specify this is for hosted env, as these can apply to non hosted env imho

> - Define a high minimum for allocation at any scale

Reviewer 3: This is not a unique prob with sidecar, you could define a high min for ztunnel or waypoint too. I think the key is sidecar scales together with your application pod.

Reviewer 3: plus sidecar is dedicated to the pod and can't be used by other pods vs ztunnel is shared per node and waypoint is shared per NS (or service account).

The sidecar architecture forces this mode of allocation on users. Ambient solves these issues by leveraging a new architecture that separates the responsibilities of zero-trust networking and L7 policy handling. This is done with two new components to Istio: ztunnels and waypoint proxies.

> 

Reviewer 6: OK, here's where you do the definition.  Maybe move this section above the "Check Out the Savings"?

The sidecar architecture forces this mode of allocation on users. Ambient solves these issues by leveraging a new architecture that separates the responsibilities of zero-trust networking and L7 policy handling. This is done with two new components to Istio: ztunnels and waypoint proxies.

> - [Ztunnels](/blog/2023/rust-based-ztunnel/) are a brand new Istio component written in Rust that are designed to be fast, secure, and lightweight. Ztunnels are deployed per node on a cluster and enable the most basic service mesh configurations for L4 features such as mTLS, telemetry, authentication, and L4 authorizations.

Reviewer 3: key point to emphasize from resource saving perspective is ztunnel serves all pods co-located on the node

> - [Waypoint proxies](/blog/2023/waypoint-proxy-made-simple/) provide L7 mesh features such as VirtualService routing, L7 telemetry, and L7 authorizations policies. Waypoints are still based on Envoy and are deployed at the namespace level per ServiceAccount.

Reviewer 3: waypoint can be either per namespace or per service account.

> - [Waypoint proxies](/blog/2023/waypoint-proxy-made-simple/) provide L7 mesh features such as VirtualService routing, L7 telemetry, and L7 authorizations policies. Waypoints are still based on Envoy and are deployed at the namespace level per ServiceAccount.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- [Waypoint proxies](/blog/2023/waypoint-proxy-made-simple/) provide L7 mesh features such as VirtualService routing, L7 telemetry, and L7 authorizations policies. Waypoints are still based on Envoy and are deployed per namespace or service account. 
```

These ztunnels and waypoint proxies work in tandem to replace sidecars in the Istio service mesh. So let’s take a closer look at how the two architectures compare in the tests above.

## A Closer Look

{{< image width="100%"
    link="cpu-by-pod.png"
    caption="CPU usage by pod for sidecar and ambient pods"
    >}}

{{< image width="100%"
    link="memory-by-pod.png"
    caption="Memory usage by pod for sidecar and ambient pods"
    >}}

{{< image width="100%"
    link="resource-usage.png"
    caption="CPU and Memory usage for cluster"
    >}}

Let’s start by looking at CPU usage by pod. In the sidecar scenarios, the containers utilizing the most CPU resources are the [frontend](https://github.com/GoogleCloudPlatform/microservices-demo/tree/main/src/frontend) service sidecars, which is main server hit by the load generators and also responsible for making any subsequent calls to other underlying microservices.

> In the ambient scenarios, a particular ztunnel's performance depends on the distribution of services across the nodes in the cluster. In the ambient with both ztunnel and waypoint proxy scenario, there is an increase in average CPU usage per ztunnel as traffic is now directed to waypoint proxies. The waypoint proxies themselves consume more resources than their sidecar counterparts since there are only three instances processing all traffic in the namespace versus one per pod in the sidecar scenario.

Reviewer 3: * The waypoint proxies themselves consume more resources than their sidecar counterparts* 

I would say something like this is expected because waypoint proxy handles L7 processing for more than multiple application pods (in your case, i think it is 48 pods).

> Next is memory usage by pod. In all Istio scenarios, memory usage stays relatively constant for each pod during the test runs. In both ambient scenarios, the L4 ztunnel consumes less memory than a sidecar. In fact, in the L4 only scenario, almost all three ztunnel instances consume less memory than a single sidecar. Waypoint proxies consume a similar amount of resources as sidecars do, but once again see a minor increase due to the same reasons outlined above for CPU. So what do these per pod usages mean for the totals across the cluster? Everything.

Reviewer 3: worth highlight ztunnel consumes less than sidecars while serving multiple apps because of written in Rust.

{{< image width="100%"
    link="total-cpu.png"
    caption="Total CPU usage for sidecar and ambient scenarios"
    >}}

> {{< image width="100%"

Reviewer 3: note: you used "total mem used" in this image while you used "max mem used" earlier (first table). can you be consistent to avoid confusion?

Also would be good to explain to reader how total is calculated.  I think it is multiple 144 (for sidecars) or multiple 3 (ztunnel) etc.

you could explain it in the table, for example 144 * 39.93 = 5750Mb

Reviewer 3: Note: sorry about commenting in the wrong table.... a little hard to co-relate. above comment is for the CPU and Memory usage for cluster table.

    link="total-memory.png"

>     caption="Total memory usage for sidecar and ambient scenarios"

Reviewer 3: I found this confusing too - @GregHanson can you clarify?

>     caption="Total memory usage for sidecar and ambient scenarios"

Reviewer 3: Thinking loud, if this is interpreted correctly, could the difference cause by the fact the load generator runs in the app?

>     caption="Total memory usage for sidecar and ambient scenarios"

Reviewer 3: Or in ambient L4/L4+L7, the total ram of workloads don't include the app pods themselves, only ztunnels and waypoints?

>     caption="Total memory usage for sidecar and ambient scenarios"

Author: this same problem was present in the fortio w/ httpbin example too - so it is not related to loadgenerator service

>     caption="Total memory usage for sidecar and ambient scenarios"

Author: the query for the green `Total of XXX of workloads` is very straightforward:
```
sum(container_memory_working_set_bytes{namespace=~"test.*"})
```
I have another test running now to compare numbers, but it almost seems like the memory for sidecar containers are somehow getting counted twice in the metric?

>     caption="Total memory usage for sidecar and ambient scenarios"

Author: ![Screenshot 2023-07-11 at 11 04 23 AM](https://github.com/istio/istio.io/assets/19473391/4e8ccecf-2826-4bd9-8ceb-7f45517c5780)
@howardjohn I added a query to keep an eye on just the application container memory usage:
```
sum(container_memory_working_set_bytes{namespace=~"test.*", container!~"istio-proxy"}) by (pod)
```
and the application containers are just using more memory with sidecars.  And since the memory increase is present in my original fortio/httpbin example - I think I can say the increase is client/server independent

any thoughts behind the increase?

>     caption="Total memory usage for sidecar and ambient scenarios"

Author: discussed offline - there was a bug in how application totals were being queried resulting in the men and CPU metrics are being calculated, resulting in those metrics being counted twice.
```
sum(container_memory_working_set_bytes{namespace=~"test.*"})
```
vs
```
sum(container_memory_working_set_bytes{namespace=~"test.*", container!=""})
```

NOTE: the _application_ CPU/MEM totals were the only chart with this error, and these values were not used in any of the above calculations

Updating charts shortly

>     caption="Total memory usage for sidecar and ambient scenarios"

Author: charts updated

>     caption="Total memory usage for sidecar and ambient scenarios"

Reviewer 3: Thanks, so this concern is addressed? @howardjohn can you confirm it from your perspective?

    >}}

{{< image width="100%"
    link="cpu-by-pod-stacked.png"
    caption="Stacked CPU usage by pod for sidecar and ambient pods"
    >}}

{{< image width="100%"
    link="memory-by-pod-stacked.png"
    caption="Stacked memory usage by pod for sidecar and ambient pods"
    >}}

> Looking at total CPU and memory utilization, we have to remember that in sidecar scenarios there are 144 sidecar containers required (48 services, 3 replicas each), while in ambient, only three ztunnel containers and 12 waypoint proxies are required. The stacked CPU and memory by pod graphs are excellent at highlighting just how many additional containers are present between scenarios. Memory usage of the Istio dataplane in the ztunnel-only ambient scenario uses *less than 1%* of what is used in sidecar scenarios, and still only 12% when waypoints are added. Looking at CPU, ztunnel uses *18%* of what sidecar scenarios require, and 60% when waypoints are deployed.

Reviewer 3: the numbers here don't match what is in the table, pls clarify.

* Looking at CPU, ztunnel uses *18%* of what sidecar scenarios require, and 60% when waypoints are deployed * 

In your table, it showed 98% saving of cpu for L4 ($1 vs $61) and almost 90% saving for L4 + L7 ($6 vs $61).

Finally, let’s consider allocation since the graphs above have only covered usage. Every sidecar resource has a default request of 100 millicores vCPU and 128 MB memory, as well as limits set for 2 vCPUs and 1 GB memory. For simplicity, we assume ztunnels and waypoint proxies have similar requests and limits as their sidecar counterparts. Breaking it down, that’s a 98% reduction in allocated resources with ztunnel, and 90% when waypoints are included.

{{< image width="100%"
    link="allocation.png"
    caption="Memory usage by pod for sidecar and ambient pods"

>     >}}

Reviewer 3: The table above column says CPU or Mem but title says Mem. please clairfy.

> Finally, let’s consider allocation since the graphs above have only covered usage. Every sidecar resource has a default request of 100 millicores vCPU and 128 MB memory. For simplicity, we assume ztunnels and waypoint proxies have similar requests and limits as their sidecar counterparts. Breaking it down, that’s a 98% reduction in allocated resources with ztunnel, and 90% when waypoints are included.

Reviewer 6: > For simplicity, we assume ztunnels and waypoint proxies have similar requests and limits as their sidecar counterparts.

I think this sentence is doing a lot of heavy lifting.  Is this really likely?  Doesn't that talk to huge inefficiencies in the old method if so? Or, at least, inefficiencies that only apply at small enough scale?

(I don't presuppose the answer to this question)

- `n2-standard-4` (4 CPU, 16 GB) at $141/month
- `n2-highmem-4` (4 CPU, 32 GB) at $191/month

Calculating the difference in memory shows 1GB costs $3.33/month. In our test this brings memory costs from $60 down to only $1 in the ztunnel-only scenario, and $6 with waypoints deployed.  Similarly for CPU:

- `n2-standard-4` (4 CPU, 16 GB) at $141/month
- `n2-highmem-2` (2 CPU, 16 GB) at $95/month

> Calculating the difference in CPU shows 1 CPU costs $23/month. In our test this brings CPU costs from over $300 down to only $7 in the ztunnel-only scenario, and $34 with waypoints deployed

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Calculating the difference in CPU shows 1 CPU costs $23/month. In our test this brings CPU costs from over $300 down to only $7 in the ztunnel-only scenario, and $34 with waypoints deployed.
```

> We can literally put a dollar amount on the savings ambient brings - and so can you!

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
We can literally put a dollar amount on the savings ambient brings.
```

## Test It Out

> In comparison to what most users run Istio with in production, this test cluster is tiny. However, we expect even more savings with larger clusters and when more services are deployed. We encourage everyone to see what the savings with Istio ambient mesh looks like in their environments. Also note that these scripts have been pushed to GitHub so feel free to check them out [here](https://github.com/solo-io/ambient-performance/tree/boutique-demo). For tracking CPU and memory usage throughout the test scenarios, versions of [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/), [node-exporter](https://prometheus.io/docs/guides/node-exporter/), and [Grafana](https://grafana.com/) are installed. A custom Grafana dashboard was created for observing relevant data, which can be found and imported from GitHub [here](https://github.com/solo-io/ambient-performance/blob/boutique-demo/dashboard/ambient-performance-analysis.json).
> 

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
For this example, we have used a small test cluster.  However, we expect the savings to scale to larger clusters and those with more services deployed. We encourage you to see what the savings with Istio ambient mesh would be in your own environments, and will be doing performance tests at large scale as we move towards production readiness.

The scripts used here are [available on GitHub](https://github.com/solo-io/ambient-performance/tree/boutique-demo). For tracking CPU and memory usage throughout the test scenarios, [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/), [node-exporter](https://prometheus.io/docs/guides/node-exporter/), and [Grafana](https://grafana.com/) are installed. [A custom Grafana dashboard](https://github.com/solo-io/ambient-performance/blob/boutique-demo/dashboard/ambient-performance-analysis.json) was created for observing relevant data.
```
scale linearly?

I maintain you would have a far more powerful story if you just took a day or two to run at actual "real production customer" scale.

## Conclusion

Ka-ching. These results were collected with an alpha version of ambient, which is now [merged into the main branch](/blog/2023/ambient-merged-istio-main/) and included in Istio 1.18.

> Huge thanks to all the Istio maintainers who work very hard to make ambient as lean and performant as possible, ambient service mesh’s goal of reducing infrastructure costs is bearing fruit and setting a solid foot forward on its roadmap to production readiness. These early numbers suggest users could cut their cloud usage by *99%* and resource requirements by *90%* – especially if users only require an L4 mesh.

Reviewer 3: You had up to 99% savings in usage and 98% in allocation earlier, while you have "cut their cloud usage by *99%* and resource requirements by *90%*" here, can you please be consistent?

Reviewer 3: Think this is clarified

> ## Conclusion
> 
> Ka-ching. These results were collected with an alpha version of ambient, which is now [merged into the main branch](/blog/2023/ambient-merged-istio-main/) and included in Istio 1.18.
> 
> Huge thanks to all the Istio maintainers who work very hard to make ambient as lean and performant as possible. Ambient service mesh’s goal of reducing infrastructure costs is bearing fruit and setting a solid foot forward on its roadmap to production readiness. These early numbers suggest users could cut their cloud usage by *99%* and resource requirements by *90%* – especially if users only require an L4 mesh.
> 

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Our goals are to make ambient as lean and performant as possible. A second-order effect, though one that will be welcomed by many, is a reduction of infrastructure costs. These early numbers suggest users could cut their cloud usage by *99%* and resource requirements by *90%* – especially if users only require an L4 mesh.

```

a. you're writing this from the POV of an Istio maintainer
b. see comments above on if 99% is a realistic promise

---

> title: "Cut Service Mesh Overhead with Istio Ambient Mesh"

Reviewer 2: I already gave my feedback in slack but will repeat here: I think the general idea is good but the punchline really downplays the result. Saving $23 is... meh.

Doing a real-er world test like deploying bookinfo and/or micro-services demo in 10-100 namespaces should bump that up substantially and give more realistic numbers.

It may also be nice to compare "sidecar (naive users)", "sidecar with Sidecar (real prod users @ scale)", "ambient".

Comparing w/o `Sidecar` can easily give absurd numbers - I shared my own tests giving $50/mo vs $500k/mo, but its not really realistic to what a real users spend would be.

Reviewer 3: I agree with your comment, which is very good. I think Greg had issues with bookinfo handling requests during his test. Our intention is to publish this as it is based on small env test (which users can produce if they want to) and have a follow up blog about a more realistic app (microservices app you pointed out) on larger cluster.  The reason is timing - to rework/rerun could take much longer, would be nice to get this out before alpha goes out to encourage folks to use alpha. 

While $23 is not a lot giving the small scale env, if you consider percentage of saving it is HUGE (over 90%) already.

Reviewer 2: No where do we make any claims that the percentage saving scales beyond a demo. Most things (not from Istio specifically, just in the industry) that are showing off in a tiny demo _don't_ actually translate to benefits at scale. If I read this I would not be impressed at all, TBH. 

I don't think publishing this as-is is beneficial. If that mean we publish months from now, that seems ok to me.

Reviewer 3: I think the above feedback is resolved by running with a more realistic app (online boutique).  Please reopen if you feel differently.

description: An anaylsis of how cloud resources are utilized in ambient and sidecar service mesh architectures.
publishdate: 2023-05-10
attribution: "Greg Hanson - Solo.io"
keywords: [istio,ambient,waypoint,ztunnel]
---

> Istio Ambient Mesh is the new Istio data plane without requiring sidecars, refer to the [announcement](/blog/2022/introducing-ambient-mesh/) for more details. Istio Ambient Mesh will be included in Istio 1.18 but [pre-release builds](https://github.com/istio/istio/releases/tag/1.18.0-alpha.0) are available now.

Reviewer 3: good point

- Can strand capacity by reserving more than is needed
- Shift operational burden to adjust allocation if more than the default is needed

The sidecar architecture forces this mode of allocation on users. Ambient solves these issues by leveraging a new architecture that separates the responsibilities of zero-trust networking and L7 policy handling. This is done with two new components to Istio: ztunnels and waypoint proxies.

- [Ztunnels](/blog/2023/rust-based-ztunnel/) are a brand new Istio component written in Rust that are designed to be fast, secure, and lightweight. Ztunnels are deployed per node on a cluster and enable the most basic service mesh configurations for L4 features such as mTLS, telemetry, authentication, and L4 authorizations.
- [Waypoint proxies](/blog/2023/waypoint-proxy-made-simple/) provide L7 mesh features such as VirtualService routing, L7 telemetry, and L7 authorizations policies. Waypoints are still based on Envoy and are deployed at the namespace level per ServiceAccount.

These ztunnels and waypoint proxies work in tandem to replace sidecars in the Istio service mesh. So let’s take a closer look at how the two architectures compare in the tests above.

> ## A Closer Look

Reviewer 2: One thing that might be useful is to have a cost of "application" vs "application + ambient".

As an Istio adopter, I want to see "Adopting Istio will increase my bill by x%".

Granted that may be a pretty user-specific number... but may be useful to ballpark. If micro-services demo has reasonable `requests` it can be an ok approximation.

Author: So I do indirectly include that comparison in the `total-cpu` and `total-memory` charts.  Where yellow includes only istio data path pods (sidecars/ztunnel/waypoints) and green includes datapath pods + application pods.  The green charts are not really analyzed since it is application/user-specific

    link="total-cpu.png"
    caption="Total CPU usage for sidecar and ambient scenarios"
    >}}

{{< image width="100%"
    link="total-memory.png"
    caption="Total memory usage for sidecar and ambient scenarios"
    >}}

{{< image width="100%"
    link="cpu-by-pod.png"
    caption="Stacked CPU usage by pod for sidecar and ambient pods"
    >}}

{{< image width="100%"
    link="memory-by-pod-stacked.png"
    caption="Stacked memory usage by pod for sidecar and ambient pods"
    >}}

Looking at total CPU and memory utilization, we have to remember that in sidecar scenarios there are 31 sidecar containers required (one Fortio client and 30 httpbin servers), while in ambient, only three ztunnel containers and three waypoint proxies are required. The stacked CPU and memory by pod graphs are excellent at highlighting just how many additional containers are present between scenarios. Memory usage of the Istio dataplane in the ztunnel-only ambient scenario uses *1%* of what is used in sidecar scenarios, and still only 10% when waypoints are added. Looking at CPU, ztunnel once again uses *1%* of what sidecar scenarios require, and 15% when waypoints are deployed.

> Finally, let’s consider allocation since the graphs above have only covered usage. Every sidecar resource has a default request of 100 millicores vCPU and 128 MB memory, as well as limits set for 2 vCPUs and 1 GB memory. For simplicity, we assume ztunnels and waypoint proxies have similar requests and limits as their sidecar counterparts – even though every measurement so far has suggested ztunnels will require significantly less. Breaking it down, that’s a 90% reduction in allocated resources with ztunnel, and 80% when waypoints are included.

Reviewer 2: A bit worried this simplification ends up meaning that we are just strictly comparing "number of proxies". Which is a bit of a simplistic model. I don't feel great about saying 1 ztunnel == 1 sidecar == 1 waypoint when we know its not true.

Author: > 1 ztunnel == 1 sidecar == 1 waypoint 

is your issue with the assumption that waypoints and ztunnels are using the same request/limits as sidecars even though performance data so far suggests otherwise?  That I should be using different values for ztunnel in particular?

Reviewer 2: Yes. Otherwise this is just counting proxies, which is a much simpler blog post and could be 2-3 sentences long

## Conclusion

Ka-ching. These results were collected with a pre-alpha version of ambient which is now [merged into the main branch](/blog/2023/ambient-merged-istio-main/).

Ambient service mesh’s goal of reducing infrastructure costs is bearing fruit and setting a solid foot forward on its roadmap to production readiness. These early numbers suggest users could cut their cloud usage by *99%* and resource requirements by *90%* – especially if users only require an L4 mesh.

> ## Learn More About Istio Ambient Mesh

Reviewer 2: nit: remove authors(they are on the page anyways) and the cloudcast one.

And maybe link to our new istio.io docs instead of just blogs?

Reviewer 3: seems reasonable to me

---
title: "Cut Service Mesh Overhead with Istio Ambient Mesh"
description: An anaylsis of how cloud resources are utilized in ambient and sidecar service mesh architectures.
publishdate: 2023-05-10
attribution: "Greg Hanson - Solo.io"
keywords: [istio,ambient,waypoint,ztunnel]
---

> Istio Ambient Mesh is the new Istio data plane introduced in the Istio community on September 7, 2022 with leading contributions from Solo.io and Google engineers. [Read the full announcement](https://istio.io/latest/blog/2022/introducing-ambient-mesh/) on Istio’s website. Istio Ambient Mesh will be included in Istio 1.18 but [pre-release builds](https://github.com/istio/istio/releases/tag/1.18.0-alpha.0) are available now. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Istio Ambient Mesh is the new Istio data plane without requiring sidecars, refer to the [announcement](/blog/2022/introducing-ambient-mesh/) for more details. Istio Ambient Mesh will be included in Istio 1.18 but [pre-release builds](https://github.com/istio/istio/releases/tag/1.18.0-alpha.0) are available now. 
```

> Istio Ambient Mesh is the new [Istio data plane](https://www.solo.io/topics/istio/istio-architecture/) introduced in the Istio community on September 7, 2022 with leading contributions from Solo.io and Google engineers. [Read the full announcement](https://istio.io/latest/blog/2022/introducing-ambient-mesh/) on Istio’s website. Istio Ambient Mesh will be included in Istio 1.18 but [pre-release builds](https://github.com/istio/istio/releases/tag/1.18.0-alpha.0) are available now. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Istio Ambient Mesh is the new Istio data plane introduced in the Istio community on September 7, 2022 with leading contributions from Solo.io and Google engineers. [Read the full announcement](https://istio.io/latest/blog/2022/introducing-ambient-mesh/) on Istio’s website. Istio Ambient Mesh will be included in Istio 1.18 but [pre-release builds](https://github.com/istio/istio/releases/tag/1.18.0-alpha.0) are available now. 
```

Sidecars have been a staple of Istio’s architecture since day one and are responsible for the majority of features available in Istio today. However, sidecars require the injection of an additional container to each Kubernetes pod resource, each of which needs allocated resources from the pod.

> Many of you are familiar with the simplified operation brought by the Istio ambient architecture. Let’s explore how [Istio Ambient Mesh](https://istio.io/latest/blog/2022/introducing-ambient-mesh/) cuts the service mesh costs typically associated with sidecars.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Many of you are familiar with the simplified operation brought by the Istio ambient architecture. Let’s explore how ambient mesh cuts the service mesh costs typically associated with sidecars.
```

## Check Out the Savings

Our test scenario deploys one [Fortio](https://github.com/fortio/fortio) client instance and three different versions of the [httpbin](https://github.com/postmanlabs/httpbin) service, each scaled to 10 replicas. The Fortio client will send requests to version 1 of httpbin for a few minutes, repeat the same for version 2, and finally for version 3. The tests deployed Istio in several scenarios and resource usage and allocation are compared across the runs. The scenarios are:

 - Istio with sidecar
 - Ambient with L4 ztunnel only
 - Ambient with L4 ztunnel and L7 waypoint proxies

Spoilers! There are significant savings across the board for all ambient scenarios when compared to sidecars – up to 99% savings in usage and 90% in allocation.

{{< image width="100%"
    link="savings.png"
    caption="Total Memory and CPU: Consumption and Allocation"
    >}}

> Looking at total CPU and memory consumption, we have to remember that in the [ambient architecture](https://istio.io/latest/blog/2022/introducing-ambient-mesh/), there are not sidecar containers for every application pod in the mesh. The result is that memory usage of Istio’s dataplane in the ztunnel-only ambient scenario uses *1%* of what is used in sidecar scenarios, and still only 10% when waypoints are added. Looking at CPU, ztunnel once again uses *1%* of what the sidecar scenario requires, and 15% when waypoints are deployed.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Looking at total CPU and memory consumption, we have to remember that in the [ambient architecture](/latest/blog/2022/introducing-ambient-mesh/), there are not sidecar containers for every application pod in the mesh. The result is that memory usage of Istio’s dataplane in the ztunnel-only ambient scenario uses *1%* of what is used in sidecar scenarios, and still only 10% when waypoints are added. Looking at CPU, ztunnel once again uses *1%* of what the sidecar scenario requires, and 15% when waypoints are deployed.
```

## Where the Savings Are Coming From

Ambient mesh was designed to minimize resource requirements for users in their Kubernetes clusters. To explain how ambient does this, we must first clarify allocation versus utilization. When deploying a Kubernetes cluster on a hosted environment, nodes determine the overall capacity of the cluster and customer deployments, and pods are an allocation of that capacity. Utilization is a measure of how well this is done. As an architecture, sidecars interfere with effective utilization as they:

 - Define a high minimum for allocation at any scale
 - Can strand capacity by reserving more than is needed
 - Shift operational burden to adjust allocation if more than the default is needed

The sidecar architecture forces this mode of allocation on users. Ambient solves these issues by leveraging a new architecture that separates the responsibilities of zero-trust networking and L7 policy handling. This is done with two new components to Istio: ztunnels and waypoint proxies.

>  - [Ztunnels](https://istio.io/latest/blog/2023/rust-based-ztunnel/) are a brand new Istio component written in Rust that are designed to be fast, secure, and lightweight. Ztunnels are deployed per node on a cluster and enable the most basic service mesh configurations for L4 features such as mTLS, telemetry, authentication, and L4 authorizations.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
 - [Ztunnels](/blog/2023/rust-based-ztunnel/) are a brand new Istio component written in Rust that are designed to be fast, secure, and lightweight. Ztunnels are deployed per node on a cluster and enable the most basic service mesh configurations for L4 features such as mTLS, telemetry, authentication, and L4 authorizations.
```

>  - [Waypoint proxies](https://istio.io/latest/blog/2023/waypoint-proxy-made-simple/) provide L7 mesh features such as VirtualService routing, L7 telemetry, and L7 authorizations policies. Waypoints are still based on Envoy and are deployed at the namespace level per ServiceAccount. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
 - [Waypoint proxies](/blog/2023/waypoint-proxy-made-simple/) provide L7 mesh features such as VirtualService routing, L7 telemetry, and L7 authorizations policies. Waypoints are still based on Envoy and are deployed at the namespace level per ServiceAccount. 
```

>  - [Waypoint proxies](https://istio.io/latest/blog/2023/waypoint-proxy-made-simple/) provide L7 mesh features such as VirtualService routing, L7 telemetry, and L7 authorizations policies. Waypoints are still based on Envoy and are deployed at the namespace level per ServiceAccount. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
 - [Waypoint proxies](/blog/2023/waypoint-proxy-made-simple/) provide L7 mesh features such as VirtualService routing, L7 telemetry, and L7 authorizations policies. Waypoints are still based on Envoy and are deployed at the namespace level per ServiceAccount. 
```

 - n2-standard-4 (4CPU, 16GB) at $141/month
 - n2-highmem-2 (2CPU, 16GB) at $95/month

Calculating the difference results in 1 CPU costing approximately $23/month. We can literally put a dollar amount on the savings ambient brings! 

## Test It Out!

In comparison to what most users run Istio with in production, this test cluster is tiny. However, we expect even more savings with larger clusters and when more services are deployed. We encourage everyone to see what the savings with Istio ambient mesh look like in their environments. Also note that these scripts have been pushed to GitHub so feel free to check them out [here](https://github.com/solo-io/ambient-performance/tree/fortio-ambient). For tracking CPU and memory usage throughout the test scenarios, versions of [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/), [node-exporter](https://prometheus.io/docs/guides/node-exporter/), and [Grafana](https://grafana.com/) are installed. A custom Grafana dashboard was created for observing relevant data, which can be found and imported from GitHub [here](https://github.com/solo-io/ambient-performance/blob/fortio-ambient/dashboard/ambient-performance-analysis.json).

## Conclusion

> Ka-ching. These results were collected with a pre-alpha version of ambient which is now [merged into the main branch](https://istio.io/latest/blog/2023/ambient-merged-istio-main/). 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Ka-ching. These results were collected with a pre-alpha version of ambient which is now [merged into the main branch](/latest/blog/2023/ambient-merged-istio-main/). 
```

> Ambient service mesh’s goal of reducing infrastructure costs is bearing fruit and setting a solid foot forward on its roadmap to production readiness. These early numbers suggest users could cut their cloud usage by *99%* and resource requirements by *90%* – especially if users only require an L4 mesh.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Thank you to all the Istio maintainers who work very hard to make ambient as lean and performant as possible, ambient service mesh’s goal of reducing infrastructure costs is bearing fruit and setting a solid foot forward on its roadmap to production readiness. These early numbers suggest users could cut their cloud usage by *99%* and resource requirements by *90%* – especially if users only require an L4 mesh.
```

Reviewer 3: @louiscryan @GregHanson does this seem reasonable place to add thanks!

Author: lgtm on placement.  Not sure if the comma works for joining the two sentences together
>and performant as possible, ***making*** ambient service

but then the sentence seems to be bordering run-on with respect to length

Reviewer 3: feel free to rework it - i did it from UI, hard to see "length"

## Learn More About Istio Ambient Mesh

Check out these resources to learn more:

>  - [Introducing Ambient Mesh](/blog/2022/introducing-ambient-mesh/) article from John Howard – Google, Ethan J. Jackson – Google, Yuval Kohavi – Solo.io, Idit Levine – Solo.io, Justin Pettit – Google, Lin Sun – Solo.io

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
 - [Introducing Ambient Mesh](/latest/blog/2022/introducing-ambient-mesh/) article from John Howard – Google, Ethan J. Jackson – Google, Yuval Kohavi – Solo.io, Idit Levine – Solo.io, Justin Pettit – Google, Lin Sun – Solo.io
```

>  - [Introducing Ambient Mesh](https://istio.io/latest/blog/2022/introducing-ambient-mesh/) article from John Howard – Google, Ethan J. Jackson – Google, Yuval Kohavi – Solo.io, Idit Levine – Solo.io, Justin Pettit – Google, Lin Sun – Solo.io

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
 - [Introducing Ambient Mesh](/blog/2022/introducing-ambient-mesh/) article from John Howard – Google, Ethan J. Jackson – Google, Yuval Kohavi – Solo.io, Idit Levine – Solo.io, Justin Pettit – Google, Lin Sun – Solo.io
```

>  - [Get Started with Ambient Mesh](/blog/2022/get-started-ambient/) guide by Lin Sun – Solo.io, John Howard – Google

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
 - [Get Started with Ambient Mesh](/latest/blog/2022/get-started-ambient/) guide by Lin Sun – Solo.io, John Howard – Google
```

>  - [Get Started with Ambient Mesh](https://istio.io/latest/blog/2022/get-started-ambient/) guide by Lin Sun – Solo.io, John Howard – Google

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
 - [Get Started with Ambient Mesh](/blog/2022/get-started-ambient/) guide by Lin Sun – Solo.io, John Howard – Google
```

>  - [Ambient Mesh Security Deep Dive](/blog/2022/ambient-security/) article by Ethan Jackson – Google, Yuval Kohavi – Solo.io, Justin Pettit – Google, Christian Posta – Solo.io

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
 - [Ambient Mesh Security Deep Dive](/latest/blog/2022/ambient-security/) article by Ethan Jackson – Google, Yuval Kohavi – Solo.io, Justin Pettit – Google, Christian Posta – Solo.io
```

>  - [Ambient Mesh Security Deep Dive](https://istio.io/latest/blog/2022/ambient-security/) article by Ethan Jackson – Google, Yuval Kohavi – Solo.io, Justin Pettit – Google, Christian Posta – Solo.io

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
 - [Ambient Mesh Security Deep Dive](/blog/2022/ambient-security/) article by Ethan Jackson – Google, Yuval Kohavi – Solo.io, Justin Pettit – Google, Christian Posta – Solo.io
```

>  - [Introducing Rust-Based Ztunnel for Istio Ambient Mesh](https://istio.io/latest/blog/2023/rust-based-ztunnel/) article by Lin Sun – Solo.io, John Howard – Google

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
 - [Introducing Rust-Based Ztunnel for Istio Ambient Mesh](/latest/blog/2023/rust-based-ztunnel/) article by Lin Sun – Solo.io, John Howard – Google
```

 - [Istio Ambient Waypoint Proxy Made Simple](/latest/blog/2023/waypoint-proxy-made-simple/) article by Lin Sun – Solo.io, John Howard – Google

>  - [Istio Ambient Service Mesh Merged to Istio’s Main Branch](https://istio.io/latest/blog/2023/ambient-merged-istio-main/) article by Lin Sun – Solo.io, John Howard – Google

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
 - [Istio Ambient Service Mesh Merged to Istio’s Main Branch](/latest/blog/2023/ambient-merged-istio-main/) article by Lin Sun – Solo.io, John Howard – Google
```
